# 2. aFootball: The Football Universe

**Charles R Paez Monzon** - 2019 - aNatureTechnologies

                                               - Mein Fuβball Weltanschauung

1. TOC
{:toc}

## 2.1. A Relational Dynamics Model for Football Universe
In this work, the arquetipical mechanics will dominates, but with persistent intromission of the alternative view [Smolin] of
_relations_ between things, agents, events in the unbounded landscape once we have a model of the internal structure of the 
world, the '_world of football_' in our case of study.
Science needs mathematical theory to **model the world phenomena** and to discovery the **laws of relational dynamics** based 
on a preminence of the ideas of _observable of relations_ and _state of relations_. Let us explore this mathematical 
perspective of the world in order to have an idea about all possible world that can happens in the **relational Footbal 
Universe** or **aFootball**[^1].

This relational football is already present in the middle of football data science departments and enterprises like StatsBomb,
Opta, Wyscout, etc. Their dataframes are events driven and columns pairs are relations between relevant observables inside the 
pitch. Figure 2.1 shows a dataframe of all the events in the range (2526..2537) of the effective possession phase 152, that 
corresponds to the 98th possession brake 'PB'. Phase possession of 'Barcelona' starts with from a throw in 'play pattern id' 4 
at xy-location (13.9,1.0) in the minute 68. The sequence of events ends up in event 2637 at xy-location (63.9,36.7). This 
manner to describe football has adopted the physical-mathematical model of observables and states relations that marks time as 
an event-driven variable, that adopts the manner footballers experience their football universe on the pitch. I am 
mathematical modeling such an experience, that is all.

![](/images/LevyFlightEffdf.png "Figure 2.1. ")

### 2.1.1. Relevant Observations

In football, the **relevant observation** of Gon is measure _change in ball position_ and _game-time_, _together_ and yields an
event-coordinate tuple (α, β). This relevant observation is an _**event**_. Each event has relations with the rest of the 
football universe and, that set of relations constitutes its _view_ of the universe. Each view has to be unique.

The 'actual' in a CHAS complex hierarchical adaptive system, as a football game, on average keep expanding into the 'adjacent 
possible' [S Kauffman]. By doing so, they increase the diversity of what can happen next. Increase the 'novelty' of events. 
Each player maximize the rate of exploration of adjacent possibles as fast as they can get away with it.

If in the '_actual_' there are two events, let us explore their 'adjacent possible' 1-step neighborhood away from the
'actual'. And sooner than later we can identify n-step neighborhood where they start to diverge. If n is smaller than m, these
two events views are more distinguishable from one another in n than in m. Therefore, we most expect with the latest mindset 
of science that football dynamics _maximizes '_variety_'. Two players associated with these two events do not need to be near
to have very similar views because they are in a closed space. So they could be happen far away and not necesarily near by.
So, synergy can  create 'entanglement' of their _views_ and **intelligent and synergestic decisions** can be simultaneously 
adopted.

Let be C the  **2D relation-space with event-coordinates (α, β) on the unbounded landscape**.

Let us look forward for mathematical laws that rule **sequence of events**. Call an unparametrized curve γ in C a **motion γ** 
of the system - a football motion -. Perform a sequence of measurements of pairs (α, β), and find that the points representing 
the measured pairs sit on a motion γ. Then we say that γ is a football motion. We express a football motion as a **relation in 
C**

                                     f(α, β) = 0                                           (1)

Thus a _motion γ_ is a **relation (or a correlation) between partial observables**. Let say, between the player on the ball 
and his teammate that moves to open space to receive the pass. Or, between the player on the ball that decide a pass and a 
rival player who guess his action and intercepts the ball re-gaining possession.

### 2.1.2. Space of Space of Any Possible Football Flow

Then, disturb the system - with a football action like receiving or intercepting the ball being passed - and repeat the 
analysis all over again. At each new disturbance, a new football play - motion - γ is found. 

At the end, The _space of sequences of football motions or **trajectories** in the unbounded landscape is limited_. It is just 
a 2D subspace of the space of spaces:the infinite dimensional football space of all football motions. Only a **2D space Γ of γ
curves - _trajectories- ** can be realized in the unbounded landscape.

Bingo. If we fix the place of the goal archeries, and patch the unbounded landscape; we get a **bounded landscape** and we can 
know about all **possible football flow dynamics** that can happen in the bounded landscape. ! We can compute - the all 
possible football flow dynamics - without any player !

In a small perturbation, we can coordinatize a football motion γ by - a rotation - two real numbers A >= 0 and 0 ≤ φ < 2π, and 
(1) is given by
                        f(α, β; A, φ) = α − A g(ωβ + φ) = 0                               (2)
                        
and gives curve γ in C for each couple (A, φ). Let us call it (2) the matemathical **law of football relational dynamics**.

### 2.1.3. Relativistyic State

As Γ is the *2D football space of football motions, coordinatized by A and φ*. Γ is the **relativistic phase space** of the 
bounded landscape - the space of football motions -. And a _point in Γ_ is a **relativistic state**, the second relevant 
concept that we have been looking for.

A _relativistic state_ is determined by a couple (A, φ). It determines a _curve γ in the (α, β) plane_. That is, it determines
_a correlations between the two partial observables α and β_, via (2).

When a team re-gain possession during a match, let me say at alpha α-point relativistic state, through an **alpha-event** open 
the adjacent possible of a sequence of intelligent, cognitive and synergestic event pipeline of football flow dynamics towards 
the rival goal. Such a sequence is a *protopian-trajectory* of incremental progress of '_expected goal_ xG' accomplishing xG 
football motion by football motion in the sequence that in case of end in an **omega event** with a pass to the net of the 
rival goal we call it a **Levy flight**, an actual football flow dynamics from alpha α-point to omega point where a teammate 
player scores a goal.

The most important _relativistic observable_ will be the scored minus conceded goals or '_goal difference_' of each team and
in terms of analytics, the 'xG_difference' product of the effective action porcentage executed at the collection of omega-
events that happened during the match. A relational view of a Levy Flight or an effective phase possession that ends up in a
goal scored has been described and illustrated in relational drawings produced with '_matplotsoccer_' library [Decroos] like
show in Figure 2.2.

![](/images/LevyFlights_BELENG_WC2018.png "Figure 2.2.")

Now Gon has been learning and starting to talk a new '**language game**' for aFICS football and the local community - HC 
technical team and synergons - that now on will begin to speak it fluently. But,any how the mathematical mindset push me to
formalize it.

## 2.2. The New Language Game for aFootball

The triple (C,Γ,f) called **language game** is sufficient to describe all the analytics and predictions of classical mechanics 
and broad enough to describe possible adjacent relations between relevant observables in the football flow dynamics. 

The **language game for aFootball** is based on a set of concepts

- The relativistic configuration space C, of partial observable
- The relativistic phase space Γ, of the relativistic states, and
- The evolution equation f=0, where f: Γ X C -> V a linear space.

The state in the football phase space Γ is in stasis until the system is disturbed. Each relativistic state in Γ determines 
(via f = 0) a football motion γ of the system, namely a relation, or a set of relations, between the observables in C. Once 
the adjacent relativistic state is determined (or guessed), the evolution equation predicts all the possible events, namely
all the allowed correlations between the observables, in any subsequent measurement.

In the football language, notions like instantaneous state, equilibrium state, evolution in time, observable at time t have 
no role to play and have no sense in this context. May be, we must take into account:

- The _thermal time hypothesis_. In nature, so in football, all variables are equivalent; we can find the system in an 
arbitrary state ρ; if the system is in a state ρ, then a preferred variable is singled out by the state of the system. This 
variable is what we call **time** and has no meaning in the structure of the world and the **flow of time** is the flow in 
which football happens to be, when described in terms of the macroscopic parameters we  have chosen. So, the language game and 
football flow dynamics are event driven.

This new 'language game' to be used about the new football universe in which all are immersed today. It is an innovation and
a disruption to be assimilated as culture or dominant mindset for academies, clubs, associations, players, head coaches, 
trainers, agents, journalists, fans, enterpreses and, any alien in the aFootball Universe. 

[^1]: In geometric calculus disciplines, like Clifford algebras, any 2D motion is a rotation and any trajectory a multivector 
or sequence of rotations. This comment is material for another special blog publication.
